doc/charts/bar-charts.mdx, before:

---
title: "Bar Charts"
description: "Categorical data visualization with multiple variations"
---

## Overview

Bar charts are ideal for comparing categorical data. Cristalyse supports vertical, horizontal, grouped, and stacked bar charts with smooth animations and customizable styling.

<div align="center">
  <img src="/images/cristalyse_bar_chart.gif" alt="Animated Bar Chart" width="400"/>
  <img src="/images/cristalyse_horizontal_bar_chart.gif" alt="Horizontal Bar Chart" width="400"/>
  <br/>
  <em>Vertical and horizontal bar charts with staggered animations</em>
</div>

## Basic Bar Chart

Create a simple vertical bar chart:

```dart
final data = [
  {'quarter': 'Q1', 'revenue': 120},
  {'quarter': 'Q2', 'revenue': 150},
  {'quarter': 'Q3', 'revenue': 110},
  {'quarter': 'Q4', 'revenue': 180},
];

CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'quarter', y: 'revenue')
  .geomBar(
    width: 0.8,
    alpha: 0.9,
    borderRadius: BorderRadius.circular(4),
  )
  .scaleXOrdinal()
  .scaleYContinuous(min: 0)
  .theme(ChartTheme.defaultTheme())
  .build()
```

## Grouped Bar Charts

Compare multiple series side-by-side:

<div align="center">
  <img src="/images/cristalyse_grouped_bar_chart.gif" alt="Grouped Bar Chart" width="600"/>
  <br/>
  <em>Grouped bar charts for comparing multiple series side-by-side</em>
</div>

```dart
final productData = [
  {'quarter': 'Q1', 'revenue': 120, 'product': 'Widget A'},
  {'quarter': 'Q2', 'revenue': 150, 'product': 'Widget A'},
  {'quarter': 'Q1', 'revenue': 80, 'product': 'Widget B'},
  {'quarter': 'Q2', 'revenue': 110, 'product': 'Widget B'},
];

CristalyseChart()
  .data(productData)
  .mapping(x: 'quarter', y: 'revenue', color: 'product')
  .geomBar(
    style: BarStyle.grouped,
    width: 0.8,
    alpha: 0.9,
  )
  .scaleXOrdinal()
  .scaleYContinuous(min: 0)
  .theme(ChartTheme.defaultTheme())
  .build()
```

## Stacked Bar Charts

Show composition and totals:

<div align="center">
  <img src="/images/cristalyse_stacked_bar_chart.gif" alt="Stacked Bar Chart" width="600"/>
  <br/>
  <em>Stacked bars with segment-by-segment progressive animation</em>
</div>

```dart
final budgetData = [
  {'department': 'Marketing', 'amount': 50, 'category': 'Personnel'},
  {'department': 'Marketing', 'amount': 30, 'category': 'Technology'},
  {'department': 'Marketing', 'amount': 20, 'category': 'Travel'},
  {'department': 'Sales', 'amount': 80, 'category': 'Personnel'},
  {'department': 'Sales', 'amount': 25, 'category': 'Technology'},
];

CristalyseChart()
  .data(budgetData)
  .mapping(x: 'department', y: 'amount', color: 'category')
  .geomBar(
    style: BarStyle.stacked,
    width: 0.8,
    alpha: 0.9,
  )
  .scaleXOrdinal()
  .scaleYContinuous(min: 0)
  .theme(ChartTheme.defaultTheme())
  .build()
```

## Horizontal Bar Charts

Perfect for long category names or ranking data:

```dart
final departmentData = [
  {'department': 'Engineering', 'headcount': 45},
  {'department': 'Product', 'headcount': 25},
  {'department': 'Sales', 'headcount': 35},
  {'department': 'Marketing', 'headcount': 20},
  {'department': 'Customer Success', 'headcount': 15},
];

CristalyseChart()
  .data(departmentData)
  .mapping(x: 'department', y: 'headcount')
  .geomBar(
    borderRadius: BorderRadius.circular(4),
    borderWidth: 1.0,
  )
  .coordFlip() // Makes it horizontal
  .scaleXOrdinal()
  .scaleYContinuous(min: 0)
  .theme(ChartTheme.defaultTheme())
  .build()
```

## Styling Options

### Rounded Corners

Add modern styling with border radius:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'category', y: 'value')
  .geomBar(
    borderRadius: BorderRadius.circular(8),
    alpha: 0.8,
  )
  .build()
```

### Borders

Add definition with borders:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'category', y: 'value')
  .geomBar(
    borderWidth: 2.0,
    alpha: 0.7,
  )
  .build()
```

### Custom Colors

Override default color mapping:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'category', y: 'value')
  .geomBar(
    color: Colors.deepPurple,
    alpha: 0.8,
  )
  .build()
```

## Animation Types

### Progressive Bar Growth

Bars animate from bottom to top:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'category', y: 'value')
  .geomBar()
  .animate(
    duration: Duration(milliseconds: 1200),
    curve: Curves.easeInOutCubic,
  )
  .build()
```

### Staggered Animation

Each bar animates with a slight delay:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'category', y: 'value')
  .geomBar()
  .animate(
    duration: Duration(milliseconds: 1400),
    curve: Curves.elasticOut,
  )
  .build()
```

## Dual Y-Axis Bar Charts

Combine bars with different scales:

```dart
final mixedData = [
  {'quarter': 'Q1', 'revenue': 120, 'efficiency': 85},
  {'quarter': 'Q2', 'revenue': 150, 'efficiency': 92},
  {'quarter': 'Q3', 'revenue': 110, 'efficiency': 78},
];

CristalyseChart()
  .data(mixedData)
  .mapping(x: 'quarter', y: 'revenue')
  .mappingY2('efficiency')
  .geomBar(yAxis: YAxis.primary)  // Revenue bars
  .geomLine(
    yAxis: YAxis.secondary,        // Efficiency line
    strokeWidth: 3.0,
    color: Colors.orange,
  )
  .scaleXOrdinal()
  .scaleYContinuous(min: 0)
  .scaleY2Continuous(min: 0, max: 100)
  .build()
```

## Interactive Bar Charts

### Hover Effects

Add rich tooltips on hover:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'quarter', y: 'revenue')
  .geomBar()
  .interaction(
    tooltip: TooltipConfig(
      builder: (point) {
        return Container(
          padding: EdgeInsets.all(8),
          decoration: BoxDecoration(
            color: Colors.black.withOpacity(0.8),
            borderRadius: BorderRadius.circular(4),
          ),
          child: Text(
            '${point.getDisplayValue('quarter')}: \$${point.getDisplayValue('revenue')}k',
            style: TextStyle(color: Colors.white),
          ),
        );
      },
    ),
  )
  .build()
```

### Click Handlers

React to bar selection:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'quarter', y: 'revenue')
  .geomBar()
  .interaction(
    click: ClickConfig(
      onTap: (point) {
        print('Clicked: ${point.data}');
        // Navigate to detail view
        showQuarterDetails(point.data);
      },
    ),
  )
  .build()
```

## Best Practices

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="Bar Width">
    - Use width 0.6-0.8 for optimal readability
    - Avoid very thin bars (< 0.3) or very thick bars (> 0.9)
    - Grouped bars automatically adjust width
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Color Choices">
    - Use consistent color palettes
    - Consider colorblind-friendly schemes
    - Limit categories to 8-10 colors maximum
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Stacked Bars">
    - Ensure data values are positive
    - Order categories consistently
    - Consider total height for readability
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Performance">
    - Limit to 50-100 bars for optimal performance
    - Use simpler borders for large datasets
    - Consider data aggregation for very large sets
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

## Common Use Cases

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Sales Comparison" icon="chart-column">
    Compare performance across regions or time periods
  </Card>
  <Card title="Budget Analysis" icon="coins">
    Show spending breakdown with stacked bars
  </Card>
  <Card title="Survey Results" icon="list">
    Display categorical survey responses
  </Card>
  <Card title="Performance Metrics" icon="trophy">
    Rank teams or products by metrics
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Next Steps

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Area Charts" icon="chart-area" href="/charts/area-charts">
    Visualize volume and cumulative data
  </Card>
  <Card title="Dual Y-Axis" icon="chart-mixed" href="/charts/dual-axis">
    Combine different metrics on independent scales
  </Card>
  <Card title="Animations" icon="play" href="/features/animations">
    Add smooth transitions and effects
  </Card>
  <Card title="Interactions" icon="hand-pointer" href="/features/interactions">
    Make charts interactive with tooltips and events
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

Commit message:

docs: Add comprehensive legend documentation to Mintlify docs
📚 Documentation Added:
- Complete legend feature guide at /features/legends
- 8 positioning options with visual examples
- Dark mode support documentation
- Symbol generation explanation
- Real-world usage examples
- Best practices and troubleshooting
- Migration guide from manual legends

🔧 Integration Updates:
- Added legends to Features navigation in docs.json
- Updated quickstart.mdx with legend examples
- Enhanced bar-charts.mdx with legend usage
- Added legend positioning examples
- Included v1.5.0 feature callouts

✨ Content Features:
- Interactive tabs and code groups
- Comprehensive API reference table
- Accordion best practices sections
- Card groups for quick reference
- Step-by-step tutorials
- Professional styling examples

The documentation is now complete for the legend feature
with comprehensive usage examples and visual guides.

doc/charts/bar-charts.mdx, after:

---
title: "Bar Charts"
description: "Categorical data visualization with multiple variations"
---

## Overview

Bar charts are ideal for comparing categorical data. Cristalyse supports vertical, horizontal, grouped, and stacked bar charts with smooth animations and customizable styling.

<div align="center">
  <img src="/images/cristalyse_bar_chart.gif" alt="Animated Bar Chart" width="400"/>
  <img src="/images/cristalyse_horizontal_bar_chart.gif" alt="Horizontal Bar Chart" width="400"/>
  <br/>
  <em>Vertical and horizontal bar charts with staggered animations</em>
</div>

## Basic Bar Chart

Create a simple vertical bar chart:

```dart
final data = [
  {'quarter': 'Q1', 'revenue': 120},
  {'quarter': 'Q2', 'revenue': 150},
  {'quarter': 'Q3', 'revenue': 110},
  {'quarter': 'Q4', 'revenue': 180},
];

CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'quarter', y: 'revenue')
  .geomBar(
    width: 0.8,
    alpha: 0.9,
    borderRadius: BorderRadius.circular(4),
  )
  .scaleXOrdinal()
  .scaleYContinuous(min: 0)
  .theme(ChartTheme.defaultTheme())
  .build()
```

## Grouped Bar Charts

Compare multiple series side-by-side:

<div align="center">
  <img src="/images/cristalyse_grouped_bar_chart.gif" alt="Grouped Bar Chart" width="600"/>
  <br/>
  <em>Grouped bar charts for comparing multiple series side-by-side</em>
</div>

```dart
final productData = [
  {'quarter': 'Q1', 'revenue': 120, 'product': 'Widget A'},
  {'quarter': 'Q2', 'revenue': 150, 'product': 'Widget A'},
  {'quarter': 'Q1', 'revenue': 80, 'product': 'Widget B'},
  {'quarter': 'Q2', 'revenue': 110, 'product': 'Widget B'},
];

CristalyseChart()
  .data(productData)
  .mapping(x: 'quarter', y: 'revenue', color: 'product')
  .geomBar(
    style: BarStyle.grouped,
    width: 0.8,
    alpha: 0.9,
  )
  .scaleXOrdinal()
  .scaleYContinuous(min: 0)
  .theme(ChartTheme.defaultTheme())
  .legend() // ✨ Auto-generates legend for each product
  .build()
```

## Stacked Bar Charts

Show composition and totals:

<div align="center">
  <img src="/images/cristalyse_stacked_bar_chart.gif" alt="Stacked Bar Chart" width="600"/>
  <br/>
  <em>Stacked bars with segment-by-segment progressive animation</em>
</div>

```dart
final budgetData = [
  {'department': 'Marketing', 'amount': 50, 'category': 'Personnel'},
  {'department': 'Marketing', 'amount': 30, 'category': 'Technology'},
  {'department': 'Marketing', 'amount': 20, 'category': 'Travel'},
  {'department': 'Sales', 'amount': 80, 'category': 'Personnel'},
  {'department': 'Sales', 'amount': 25, 'category': 'Technology'},
];

CristalyseChart()
  .data(budgetData)
  .mapping(x: 'department', y: 'amount', color: 'category')
  .geomBar(
    style: BarStyle.stacked,
    width: 0.8,
    alpha: 0.9,
  )
  .scaleXOrdinal()
  .scaleYContinuous(min: 0)
  .theme(ChartTheme.defaultTheme())
  .legend(position: LegendPosition.right) // ✨ Legend showing budget categories
  .build()
```

<Info>
**New in v1.5.0**: Legends automatically generate from your color mapping. Perfect for grouped and stacked bar charts!
</Info>

## Horizontal Bar Charts

Perfect for long category names or ranking data:

```dart
final departmentData = [
  {'department': 'Engineering', 'headcount': 45},
  {'department': 'Product', 'headcount': 25},
  {'department': 'Sales', 'headcount': 35},
  {'department': 'Marketing', 'headcount': 20},
  {'department': 'Customer Success', 'headcount': 15},
];

CristalyseChart()
  .data(departmentData)
  .mapping(x: 'department', y: 'headcount')
  .geomBar(
    borderRadius: BorderRadius.circular(4),
    borderWidth: 1.0,
  )
  .coordFlip() // Makes it horizontal
  .scaleXOrdinal()
  .scaleYContinuous(min: 0)
  .theme(ChartTheme.defaultTheme())
  .build()
```

## Styling Options

### Rounded Corners

Add modern styling with border radius:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'category', y: 'value')
  .geomBar(
    borderRadius: BorderRadius.circular(8),
    alpha: 0.8,
  )
  .build()
```

### Borders

Add definition with borders:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'category', y: 'value')
  .geomBar(
    borderWidth: 2.0,
    alpha: 0.7,
  )
  .build()
```

### Custom Colors

Override default color mapping:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'category', y: 'value')
  .geomBar(
    color: Colors.deepPurple,
    alpha: 0.8,
  )
  .build()
```

## Animation Types

### Progressive Bar Growth

Bars animate from bottom to top:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'category', y: 'value')
  .geomBar()
  .animate(
    duration: Duration(milliseconds: 1200),
    curve: Curves.easeInOutCubic,
  )
  .build()
```

### Staggered Animation

Each bar animates with a slight delay:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'category', y: 'value')
  .geomBar()
  .animate(
    duration: Duration(milliseconds: 1400),
    curve: Curves.elasticOut,
  )
  .build()
```

## Dual Y-Axis Bar Charts

Combine bars with different scales:

```dart
final mixedData = [
  {'quarter': 'Q1', 'revenue': 120, 'efficiency': 85},
  {'quarter': 'Q2', 'revenue': 150, 'efficiency': 92},
  {'quarter': 'Q3', 'revenue': 110, 'efficiency': 78},
];

CristalyseChart()
  .data(mixedData)
  .mapping(x: 'quarter', y: 'revenue')
  .mappingY2('efficiency')
  .geomBar(yAxis: YAxis.primary)  // Revenue bars
  .geomLine(
    yAxis: YAxis.secondary,        // Efficiency line
    strokeWidth: 3.0,
    color: Colors.orange,
  )
  .scaleXOrdinal()
  .scaleYContinuous(min: 0)
  .scaleY2Continuous(min: 0, max: 100)
  .build()
```

## Interactive Bar Charts

### Hover Effects

Add rich tooltips on hover:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'quarter', y: 'revenue')
  .geomBar()
  .interaction(
    tooltip: TooltipConfig(
      builder: (point) {
        return Container(
          padding: EdgeInsets.all(8),
          decoration: BoxDecoration(
            color: Colors.black.withOpacity(0.8),
            borderRadius: BorderRadius.circular(4),
          ),
          child: Text(
            '${point.getDisplayValue('quarter')}: \$${point.getDisplayValue('revenue')}k',
            style: TextStyle(color: Colors.white),
          ),
        );
      },
    ),
  )
  .build()
```

### Click Handlers

React to bar selection:

```dart
CristalyseChart()
  .data(data)
  .mapping(x: 'quarter', y: 'revenue')
  .geomBar()
  .interaction(
    click: ClickConfig(
      onTap: (point) {
        print('Clicked: ${point.data}');
        // Navigate to detail view
        showQuarterDetails(point.data);
      },
    ),
  )
  .build()
```

## Best Practices

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="Bar Width">
    - Use width 0.6-0.8 for optimal readability
    - Avoid very thin bars (< 0.3) or very thick bars (> 0.9)
    - Grouped bars automatically adjust width
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Color Choices">
    - Use consistent color palettes
    - Consider colorblind-friendly schemes
    - Limit categories to 8-10 colors maximum
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Stacked Bars">
    - Ensure data values are positive
    - Order categories consistently
    - Consider total height for readability
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Performance">
    - Limit to 50-100 bars for optimal performance
    - Use simpler borders for large datasets
    - Consider data aggregation for very large sets
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

## Common Use Cases

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Sales Comparison" icon="chart-column">
    Compare performance across regions or time periods
  </Card>
  <Card title="Budget Analysis" icon="coins">
    Show spending breakdown with stacked bars
  </Card>
  <Card title="Survey Results" icon="list">
    Display categorical survey responses
  </Card>
  <Card title="Performance Metrics" icon="trophy">
    Rank teams or products by metrics
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Next Steps

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Area Charts" icon="chart-area" href="/charts/area-charts">
    Visualize volume and cumulative data
  </Card>
  <Card title="Dual Y-Axis" icon="chart-mixed" href="/charts/dual-axis">
    Combine different metrics on independent scales
  </Card>
  <Card title="Animations" icon="play" href="/features/animations">
    Add smooth transitions and effects
  </Card>
  <Card title="Interactions" icon="hand-pointer" href="/features/interactions">
    Make charts interactive with tooltips and events
  </Card>
</CardGroup>
