doc/installation.mdx, before:

---
title: "Installation"
description: "Add Cristalyse to your Flutter project in seconds"
seo:
  title: 'Install Cristalyse - Flutter Data Visualization Library Setup Guide'
  description: 'Step-by-step installation guide for Cristalyse Flutter chart library. Add grammar of graphics data visualization to your Flutter project in seconds.'
  keywords: 'install cristalyse, flutter chart library installation, add cristalyse flutter, flutter visualization setup, pub.dev cristalyse'
  canonical: 'https://docs.cristalyse.com/installation'
---

## Quick Installation

Adding Cristalyse to your Flutter project is incredibly simple. Just run one command:

```bash
flutter pub add cristalyse
```

That's it! No complex setup, no additional configuration needed.

## Manual Installation

If you prefer to add the dependency manually, update your `pubspec.yaml`:

```yaml pubspec.yaml
dependencies:
  flutter:
    sdk: flutter
  cristalyse: ^1.17.0  # Latest version
```

Then run:

```bash
flutter pub get
```

## Verify Installation

Create a simple test to verify everything is working:

```dart lib/test_chart.dart
import 'package:cristalyse/cristalyse.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';

class TestChart extends StatelessWidget {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return CristalyseChart()
      .data([
        {'x': 1, 'y': 2},
        {'x': 2, 'y': 3},
        {'x': 3, 'y': 1},
      ])
      .mapping(x: 'x', y: 'y')
      .geomPoint()
      .build();
  }
}
```

If this compiles without errors, you're ready to go!

## Platform Support

Cristalyse works on all Flutter-supported platforms:

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Mobile" icon="mobile">
    <Icon icon="check" /> iOS 12+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Android API 21+
  </Card>
  <Card title="Desktop" icon="desktop">
    <Icon icon="check" /> Windows 10+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> macOS 10.14+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Linux (Ubuntu 18.04+)
  </Card>
  <Card title="Web" icon="globe">
    <Icon icon="check" /> Chrome 80+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Firefox  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Safari
  </Card>
  <Card title="Framework" icon="code">
    <Icon icon="check" /> Flutter 1.17+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Dart 3.0+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Null Safety
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Requirements

- **Flutter SDK**: 1.17.0 or higher
- **Dart SDK**: 3.0.0 or higher
- **Platforms**: iOS, Android, Web, Windows, macOS, Linux

## Dependencies

Cristalyse has minimal dependencies to keep your app lightweight:

- `flutter` (SDK)
- `path_provider` (for SVG export functionality)
- `flutter_svg` (for vector graphics support)

## Version History

| Version | Release Date | Key Features |
|---------|-------------|--------------|
| 1.17.0 | December 2025 | Bar chart positive/negative value styling with smart rounded corners and conditional colors |
| 1.16.0 | November 2025 | Integer-only ticks for continuous scales |
| 1.15.0 | November 2025 | Pinch, scroll wheel, and button-based zoom interactions |
| 1.14.0 | November 2025 | Tick configuration for continuous scales |
| 1.13.1 | November 2025 | Fixed label size calculation with default font size |
| 1.13.0 | November 2025 | Optional Y-axis titles in legends |
| 1.12.1 | November 2025 | Fixed right padding and secondary Y-axis alignment |
| 1.12.0 | November 2025 | Boundary clamping for pan operations |
| 1.11.1 | October 2025 | Fixed Y-axis bounds during X-axis panning |
| 1.11.0 | October 2025 | Programmatic pan controller with panTo() and panReset() methods |
| 1.10.3 | October 2025 | Scale padding fix for consistent chart sizing during pan operations |
| 1.10.2 | October 2025 | Heat map color unification and bounds edge case validation |
| 1.10.1 | October 2025 | Wilkinson labeling precision fix for large numbers |
| 1.10.0 | October 2025 | Axis titles and bubble size guide with edge case validation |
| 1.9.0 | October 2025 | Interactive & floating legends with click-to-toggle and custom positioning |
| 1.8.1 | October 2025 | Bidirectional documentation links and enhanced developer experience |
| 1.8.0 | October 2025 | Intelligent axis bounds with Wilkinson labeling algorithm |
| 1.7.0 | September 2025 | Progress bar charts with advanced styles and documentation improvements |
| 1.6.1 | September 2025 | MCP Server integration for AI coding assistants |
| 1.6.0 | September 2025 | Gradient color support for enhanced visualizations |
| 1.5.0 | September 2025 | Built-in legend support with dark mode compatibility |
| 1.4.0 | September 2025 | Custom category colors with palette system |
| 1.3.1 | September 2025 | Multi-series line chart rendering fixes |
| 1.3.0 | September 2025 | Comprehensive bubble chart support |
| 1.2.4 | August 2025 | Performance improvements and bug fixes |
| 1.2.3 | August 2025 | Documentation reference updates |
| 1.2.2 | August 2025 | Enhanced HeatMap text readability |
| 1.2.1 | August 2025 | Dependencies update and pie chart screenshots |
| 1.2.0 | August 2025 | Heat map chart support with animations |
| 1.1.0 | August 2025 | Advanced label formatting system |
| 1.0.1 | July 2025 | Grouped bar chart alignment fixes |
| 1.0.0 | July 2025 | Comprehensive pie chart and donut chart support |
| 0.9.4 | July 2025 | Web WASM compatibility improvements |
| 0.9.3 | July 2025 | Documentation site launch |
| 0.9.2 | July 2025 | Advanced pan control with visual clipping |
| 0.9.0 | July 2025 | Enhanced SVG export implementation |
| 0.8.0 | July 2025 | Area chart support |
| 0.7.0 | June 2025 | Interactive panning system |
| 0.6.0 | June 2025 | Interactive tooltips and click handlers |
| 0.5.0 | June 2025 | Dual Y-axis support |

## Next Steps

Now that you have Cristalyse installed, let's create your first chart:

<Card title="Quick Start Guide" icon="rocket" href="/quickstart">
  Build your first chart in 30 seconds
</Card>

## Troubleshooting

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="Pub get fails">
    Make sure you're running Flutter 1.17+ and Dart 3.0+:
    ```bash
    flutter --version
    dart --version
    ```
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Import errors">
    Verify the import statement:
    ```dart
    import 'package:cristalyse/cristalyse.dart';
    ```
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Build issues on web">
    Make sure you're using a supported browser (Chrome 80+, Firefox, Safari).
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Performance on older devices">
    Cristalyse is optimized for modern devices. For older Android devices (API < 21), consider reducing animation complexity.
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

Need help? Check our [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/rudi-q/cristalyse/issues) or [start a discussion](https://github.com/rudi-q/cristalyse/discussions).

Commit message:

release 1.17.1 fix: enable interactive tooltips for charts and fix tooltip visibility (fixes #69) (#77)

doc/installation.mdx, after:

---
title: "Installation"
description: "Add Cristalyse to your Flutter project in seconds"
seo:
  title: 'Install Cristalyse - Flutter Data Visualization Library Setup Guide'
  description: 'Step-by-step installation guide for Cristalyse Flutter chart library. Add grammar of graphics data visualization to your Flutter project in seconds.'
  keywords: 'install cristalyse, flutter chart library installation, add cristalyse flutter, flutter visualization setup, pub.dev cristalyse'
  canonical: 'https://docs.cristalyse.com/installation'
---

## Quick Installation

Adding Cristalyse to your Flutter project is incredibly simple. Just run one command:

```bash
flutter pub add cristalyse
```

That's it! No complex setup, no additional configuration needed.

## Manual Installation

If you prefer to add the dependency manually, update your `pubspec.yaml`:

```yaml pubspec.yaml
dependencies:
  flutter:
    sdk: flutter
  cristalyse: ^1.17.1  # Latest version
```

Then run:

```bash
flutter pub get
```

## Verify Installation

Create a simple test to verify everything is working:

```dart lib/test_chart.dart
import 'package:cristalyse/cristalyse.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';

class TestChart extends StatelessWidget {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return CristalyseChart()
      .data([
        {'x': 1, 'y': 2},
        {'x': 2, 'y': 3},
        {'x': 3, 'y': 1},
      ])
      .mapping(x: 'x', y: 'y')
      .geomPoint()
      .build();
  }
}
```

If this compiles without errors, you're ready to go!

## Platform Support

Cristalyse works on all Flutter-supported platforms:

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Mobile" icon="mobile">
    <Icon icon="check" /> iOS 12+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Android API 21+
  </Card>
  <Card title="Desktop" icon="desktop">
    <Icon icon="check" /> Windows 10+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> macOS 10.14+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Linux (Ubuntu 18.04+)
  </Card>
  <Card title="Web" icon="globe">
    <Icon icon="check" /> Chrome 80+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Firefox  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Safari
  </Card>
  <Card title="Framework" icon="code">
    <Icon icon="check" /> Flutter 1.17+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Dart 3.0+  
    <Icon icon="check" /> Null Safety
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Requirements

- **Flutter SDK**: 1.17.0 or higher
- **Dart SDK**: 3.0.0 or higher
- **Platforms**: iOS, Android, Web, Windows, macOS, Linux

## Dependencies

Cristalyse has minimal dependencies to keep your app lightweight:

- `flutter` (SDK)
- `path_provider` (for SVG export functionality)
- `flutter_svg` (for vector graphics support)

## Version History

| Version | Release Date | Key Features |
|---------|-------------|--------------|
| 1.17.1 | December 2025 | Fixed tooltips not working with interactive legends |
| 1.17.0 | December 2025 | Bar chart positive/negative value styling with smart rounded corners and conditional colors |
| 1.16.0 | November 2025 | Integer-only ticks for continuous scales |
| 1.15.0 | November 2025 | Pinch, scroll wheel, and button-based zoom interactions |
| 1.14.0 | November 2025 | Tick configuration for continuous scales |
| 1.13.1 | November 2025 | Fixed label size calculation with default font size |
| 1.13.0 | November 2025 | Optional Y-axis titles in legends |
| 1.12.1 | November 2025 | Fixed right padding and secondary Y-axis alignment |
| 1.12.0 | November 2025 | Boundary clamping for pan operations |
| 1.11.1 | October 2025 | Fixed Y-axis bounds during X-axis panning |
| 1.11.0 | October 2025 | Programmatic pan controller with panTo() and panReset() methods |
| 1.10.3 | October 2025 | Scale padding fix for consistent chart sizing during pan operations |
| 1.10.2 | October 2025 | Heat map color unification and bounds edge case validation |
| 1.10.1 | October 2025 | Wilkinson labeling precision fix for large numbers |
| 1.10.0 | October 2025 | Axis titles and bubble size guide with edge case validation |
| 1.9.0 | October 2025 | Interactive & floating legends with click-to-toggle and custom positioning |
| 1.8.1 | October 2025 | Bidirectional documentation links and enhanced developer experience |
| 1.8.0 | October 2025 | Intelligent axis bounds with Wilkinson labeling algorithm |
| 1.7.0 | September 2025 | Progress bar charts with advanced styles and documentation improvements |
| 1.6.1 | September 2025 | MCP Server integration for AI coding assistants |
| 1.6.0 | September 2025 | Gradient color support for enhanced visualizations |
| 1.5.0 | September 2025 | Built-in legend support with dark mode compatibility |
| 1.4.0 | September 2025 | Custom category colors with palette system |
| 1.3.1 | September 2025 | Multi-series line chart rendering fixes |
| 1.3.0 | September 2025 | Comprehensive bubble chart support |
| 1.2.4 | August 2025 | Performance improvements and bug fixes |
| 1.2.3 | August 2025 | Documentation reference updates |
| 1.2.2 | August 2025 | Enhanced HeatMap text readability |
| 1.2.1 | August 2025 | Dependencies update and pie chart screenshots |
| 1.2.0 | August 2025 | Heat map chart support with animations |
| 1.1.0 | August 2025 | Advanced label formatting system |
| 1.0.1 | July 2025 | Grouped bar chart alignment fixes |
| 1.0.0 | July 2025 | Comprehensive pie chart and donut chart support |
| 0.9.4 | July 2025 | Web WASM compatibility improvements |
| 0.9.3 | July 2025 | Documentation site launch |
| 0.9.2 | July 2025 | Advanced pan control with visual clipping |
| 0.9.0 | July 2025 | Enhanced SVG export implementation |
| 0.8.0 | July 2025 | Area chart support |
| 0.7.0 | June 2025 | Interactive panning system |
| 0.6.0 | June 2025 | Interactive tooltips and click handlers |
| 0.5.0 | June 2025 | Dual Y-axis support |

## Next Steps

Now that you have Cristalyse installed, let's create your first chart:

<Card title="Quick Start Guide" icon="rocket" href="/quickstart">
  Build your first chart in 30 seconds
</Card>

## Troubleshooting

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="Pub get fails">
    Make sure you're running Flutter 1.17+ and Dart 3.0+:
    ```bash
    flutter --version
    dart --version
    ```
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Import errors">
    Verify the import statement:
    ```dart
    import 'package:cristalyse/cristalyse.dart';
    ```
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Build issues on web">
    Make sure you're using a supported browser (Chrome 80+, Firefox, Safari).
  </Accordion>
  
  <Accordion title="Performance on older devices">
    Cristalyse is optimized for modern devices. For older Android devices (API < 21), consider reducing animation complexity.
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

Need help? Check our [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/rudi-q/cristalyse/issues) or [start a discussion](https://github.com/rudi-q/cristalyse/discussions).
